Happiness is our essential being

Happiness lies deep within us, in the very core of our being. Happiness does not exist in any 
external object, but only in us, who are the consciousness that experiences happiness. Though we 
seem to derive happiness from external objects or experiences, the happiness that we thus enjoy in 
fact arises from within us.

Whatever turmoil our mind may be in, in the centre of our being there always exists a state of 
perfect peace and joy, like the calm in the eye of a storm. Desire and fear agitate our mind, and 
obscure from its vision the happiness that always exists within it. When a desire is satisfied, or 
the cause of a fear is removed, the surface agitation of our mind subsides, and in that temporary 
calm our mind enjoys a taste of its own innate happiness.

Happiness is thus a state of being – a state in which our mind’s habitual agitation is calmed. The 
activity of our mind disturbs it from its calm state of just being, and causes it to lose sight of 
its own innermost happiness. To enjoy happiness, therefore, all our mind need do is to cease all 
activity, returning calmly to its natural state of inactive being, as it does daily in deep sleep.

True happiness is therefore the happiness of just being, which is the perfect and absolute 
happiness that in mystical literature is known as ‘beatitude’. This true happiness of being is also 
described as "the peace of God, which passeth all understanding", because it is experienced in full 
only in the perfectly peaceful state of just being, which is the state in which all mental activity 
has subsided in the clarity of unobstructed self-consciousness. That is, since it can be 
experienced perfectly only in the state in which we are conscious merely of our own essential being 
and not of any thoughts or objects, true happiness or peace is beyond all mental comprehension.

Not only does happiness exist within us – it is in fact our true nature, our essential being. The 
transient happiness that we seem to derive from external experiences, but which actually arises 
only from within ourself, is in reality nothing other than our own essential being. The more 
clearly we are conscious of our own essential being, the more deeply and intensely do we experience 
happiness.

The degree of happiness that we experience at any moment is directly proportionate to the degree of 
clarity with which we are then conscious of our true and essential being. Therefore happiness is 
not only our essential being, but is also our consciousness of our being. In fact, since we are the 
consciousness that experiences our own being as ‘I am’, we are both being and consciousness. In 
other words, our essential being is consciousness, or more precisely it is self-consciousness – 
consciousness that knows itself clearly as ‘I am’. Therefore, since our unobstructed consciousness 
of our own being is experienced by us as happiness, in our essential nature we are non-dual being, 
consciousness and happiness.

The rising and subsequent activity of our mind distracts our attention away from our essential 
being, thereby clouding our natural clarity of self-consciousness and obscuring our awareness of 
the happiness that we really are. Therefore so long as our mind is extroverted, attending to 
anything other than our own essential being, we can never experience perfect, permanent and 
unqualified happiness. To experience true and eternal happiness, we must attain the experience of 
true self-knowledge, that is, perfectly clear consciousness of our own essential being.

In order to experience such true self-knowledge, we must withdraw our attention from everything 
other than ourself, and focus it wholly and exclusively upon our own essential being, which we 
always experience in the form of our fundamental consciousness – our primary knowledge ‘I am’.

Until and unless we attend to our innermost self in this manner, we cannot know who or what we 
really are, and unless we thereby experience a clear and certain knowledge of what we really are, 
we cannot be certain about the reality or validity of any knowledge that we may appear to have 
about other things. All our knowledge about the world and God – about science, religion, 
philosophy, physics, cosmology, psychology, theology or any other branch of human knowledge – is 
open to serious doubt so long as our knowledge about ourself – the consciousness by which all those 
other things are known – is confused and uncertain.

Therefore, if we wish to experience permanent and unqualified happiness, or to attain knowledge 
about which we can be absolutely certain, we must focus our whole attention keenly upon ourself, 
our fundamental consciousness of our own essential being, ‘I am’, in order to ascertain who or what 
we really are.

Such in brief is the simple but profound truth revealed by Bhagavan Sri Ramana.
